the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to
offer high quality educational resources
for free
to make a donation or to view additional
materials from hundreds of MIT courses
visit MIT opencourseware at ocw.mit.edu
cell potential cell potential Delta II
cell and we're going to relate this back
to Delta G so as we saw with these cells
you have this flow of electrons through
the circuit they're generated at the
anode from the oxidation reaction and
they go over to the cathode and when
your cell is running it'll generate a
potential difference this Delta II cell
between those two electrodes in the cell
so Delta II cell has a lot of different
names
it's called cell potential cell voltage
electron motive force EMF all of these
names are valid can be used I'm going to
try to call it cell potential hopefully
I'm not going to switch up but if you
see any of these it's talking about the
same thing
so overall then if we know this cell
potential we can relate this back to
Delta G and so that will then be able to
tell us whether the reaction is
spontaneous or not so the overall free
energy Gibbs free energy of the cell is
related to the cell potential by the
following equation so Delta G for the
cell minus n the number of moles of
electrons that pass through the system
Faraday's constant and that cell
potential alright so we can think about
this at a particular time we can also
think about this equation in the
standard States so let's just think
again about standard states so we can
talk about Delta G nought for the cell
and Delta e nought for the cell so Delta
e naught the cell potential cell voltage
EMF for the cell in which the products
and the reactants are in their standard
state and the unit here is bolts so we
have a new unit that we haven't used
before I think volts all right so let's
look at an example of how we would then
calculate our Delta e naught
for yourself and we'll do the sell we've
been using this whole time our cell with
zinc at the anode and copper at the
cathode and so we have our anode
reaction and again this is our oxidation
an ox and our cathode reaction cath red
so we can write it out as the reduction
reaction happening at the cathode and
the equation we're going to use for this
is the following so Delta e nought of
the cell the cell potential equals e
nought an e here is the standard
reduction potential and this is a
standard reduction potential for the
couple the reaction that's happening at
the cathode minus the standard reduction
potential for the reaction that's
happening at the anode so now we can
look up those values in the back of the
book so we have four zinc the standard
reduction potential minus point seven
six to eight and this the standard
reduction potential for the copper plus
two two electrons to copper solid
reaction plus 0.34 o two volts so now
clicker question why don't you calculate
for me what the cell potential is for
this type of cell
all right so ten more seconds
all right 81% that's right so let's take
a look at that over here so the correct
answer involves putting the standard
reduction potential for the reaction at
the cathode with the sign without
changing it as plus over here 0.34 o2
and then it's minus and then you put the
standard reduction potential in there
and this is a minus value minus 0.76 to
8 and minus a minus we get a plus and so
our answer is what 1 point 1 0 3 volts
and this is very important and it's
important to think about the reaction at
the cathode which is the copper reaction
the reaction the anode is the zinc
reaction and a lot of people try to be
too clever with these and they're like
okay but this one this this one is going
to be this one's the one that's being
oxidized so I'll switch the sign and
then put it in the equation and end up
getting it wrong so if you always
remember standard reduction potential
put here standard reduction potential
put here the equation already takes care
of the sign issue for you so don't do
anything with the sign other people say
I looked through pages and pages of
these potentials in the book and the
reaction I'm looking for isn't listed
because they're looking for an oxidation
they're not going to find the reaction
written as an oxidation in a table of
reduction potentials so all of these are
listed as reduction potentials that's
what you will find the trick is to
remember which is happening at the
cathode which is happening at the anode
and then you will always get this
problem right and it's good to get this
right because as you'll see later on
this can be step one in a multi-part
problem all right so when we
successfully calculated Delta e of a
cell the cell potential then we can ask
is the flow of electrons going to be
spontaneous for this will it it will be
and the way we know the
is that we can always come back to Delta
G so whenever you're asked if something
is spontaneous or not you always want to
think Delta G that's what I'm going to
go for I'm going to think about Delta G
so here Delta G equals minus and number
of moles of electrons Faraday's constant
times that cell potential so if the cell
potential is positive Delta G will be
negative and is a reaction spontaneous
when Delta G is negative just a it's
easy to answer it's on my shirt today
giving it all the way yes so when Delta
G is negative then you can be feeling
spontaneous it's a spontaneous reaction
so Delta e positive means Delta G
negative reaction is spontaneous all
right so now let's have a little
reminder review of what types of cells
have spontaneous reactions and what kind
involve non spontaneous reaction
all right ten more seconds
can anyone tell me what the correct name
is of the cell that involves a non
spontaneous reaction electrolytic cell
yeah
all right so if we look over here so
people knew about the galvanic that's
good right so a reaction if it's a
spontaneous reaction that will produce
an electric current that's called a
galvanic cell if it's a non spontaneous
reaction that has to be driven by
applying a current that's called an
electrolytic cell so I just threw up
another random name and to see to see if
people would go for it all right so it's
important to keep these in mind because
a lot of the problems will say things
like in this galvanic cell and you seem
like you don't have enough information
to solve the problem because the problem
didn't tell you which reaction was at
the anode or which reaction was at the
cathode so how do you do the problem
well the fact they told you it was a
galvanic cell there's only one way to
put the reactions in order for it to be
spontaneous so that's part of the
problem figuring out witches at the
anode and witches at the cathode based
on the fact that it has to be a
spontaneous reaction so knowing these
terms is really important it's hard to
do the problems without them all right
summary of this part then so a cell
operates spontaneously whether it does
or not can be determined by your cell
potential if it's positive its
spontaneous and that's because if it's
positive Delta G is negative and Delta G
is really what tells you about
spontaneity and you can calculate your
cell potential from your standard
reduction potentials that you will find
in your book all right so now let's
think about the meaning of the standard
reduction potential what's true if it's
a large positive value what's true if it
is a large negative value what we can
look at these values and know something
about the reactions so meaning of
standard product reduction potentials
what are the values tell us so a large
positive standard reduction potential
means that the element is easy to reduce
so let's look at an example so we have
fluorine
F to gas plus two electrons going to to
fluorine minus ions and this has a
standard reduction potential of plus two
point eight seven volts so large
positive number means that it's easy to
add electrons and we can think about
this in terms of what we know about
these reactions so again if it's a
positive standard reduction potential
you not that's going to mean a negative
Delta G for this reaction is written
written as the reduction reaction and so
it's favorable or spontaneous in that
direction so the reduction is
spontaneous or favorable so when you
have a large positive value here you can
think about yes fluorine wants those
electrons it spontaneously will grab
those electrons and become f- and this
also makes sense to you if you think
about your periodic table trends you
have fluorine wants to be f- it will
have its noble gas configuration than it
likes getting an extra electron so this
should make sense from other things that
we've talked about so now I could ask
the question and I will and it's a
clicker question does that make f2 a
good oxidizing agent or not
all right ten more seconds
all right
so the answer is yes f2 is easy to
reduce which makes it a good oxidizing
agent remember it's an agent of
oxidation it wants to go out there and
oxidize other things it wants to itself
be reduced so something that's a good
oxidizing agent it's easy to reduce it
wants to be reduced it wants to be an
agent of oxidation bringing oxidation to
the world so it's easy to reduce it's a
good oxidizing agent so in general you
can think about this the following way
that's just like bring the noise down a
little bit no it's a click or dick
competition day so we have a large
positive value here for a reaction for a
reduction reaction is written large
positive standard reduction potential
and the couple here f2 - f - is the
couple we're talking about and we'll say
that the oxidized species of that couple
is very oxidizing and again f2 here is
the oxidized species so the oxidized
species f2 is a good oxidizing agent
it's very oxidizing if because it has a
large positive standard reduction
potential alright so I don't know how
well this copied but here are some
standard reduction potentials they're
all in your books so it's okay if they
look terrible but the important point
here is at the top we have large
positive values so if you can see that
in your handout this is the reaction we
just talked about or the couple we just
talked about F - f - and so large
positive and then there's a gap here
there are pages and pages and pages of
these standard reduction potentials and
at the very bottom you have a large
negative number so large positive on the
top large negative on the bottom so at
the very top the oxidized species of
that couple is very oxidizing and we'll
see at the in a minute that at the
bottom the reduced species when it's a
is a negative number here the reduced
species
very reducing all right so let's look at
the reduced species and this is lithium
on the bottom so a large negative
standard reduction potential means that
the element is hard to reduce so example
lithium plus 1 plus 1 electron going to
lithium solid the standard reduction
potential for this reaction is minus 3
point zero 4 5 volts so it's hard to add
electrons to lithium plus we have a
negative standard reduction potential
which means a positive Delta G for the
reaction is written for the reduction
reaction so it's not favorable lithium
plus does not want electrons it doesn't
want to go to lithium solid so lithium
plus if it loses an electron it gets its
nice noble gas configuration it's a
group 1 element it likes to be in the
plus 1 oxidation state it doesn't want
to be reduced so is lithium plus 1 a
good oxidizing agent no it's not it does
not want to be reduced but lithium solid
is a good reducing agent it's a good
reducing agent because it wants to
reduce other things it wants to itself
become oxidized so lithium solid will
reduce other things lithium solid wants
to be oxidized it wants to be lithium
plus 1 so the rule here for those large
negative standard reduction potential
couples is that with a large negative
standard reduction potential the reduced
species is very reducing the reduced
species here is lithium so lithium is
reduced compared to lithium plus 1 this
then is very reducing it is a good
reducing agent do you think lithium plus
1 would be a good reducing agent what do
you think
so if it was a good reducing agent it
wants to reduce other things and become
oxidized you think lithium plus 2 is a
good thing not so again it's the root in
this couple
it's the reduced species that's very
reducing and so people have to you have
to think about this a little bit make
sure that you pick the right one often
you'll ask about you know rank the order
of these as as reducing agents and
people understand remember this but
don't remember which species of the
couple is going to be doing the thing so
think about what's happening lithium
solid does it want to become lithium
plus one it sure does this lithium +1
want to become lithium plus two now so
again back to it just our table just for
a second on the top large positive
oxidized species very oxidizing negative
value reduce species very reducing and
now if we look at this I don't know how
well this came out in your handout
either but part of the periodic table
for you kind of compressed over here we
have these yeah fluorine large positive
standard reduction potential easy to
reduce over here good oxidizing agents
if they get an electron if they're
reduced they get their noble gas
configuration over here we have these
negative big negative numbers easy to
oxidize the solid or the neutral to
their plus-one so they would be good
reducing agents and so this all makes
sense when you think about trends in the
periodic table alright so today we're
going to have two examples of why all of
this is in important across disciplines
so often these units are really talked
you talked about making batteries and
things like that and that is important
in fact with energy initiatives that's
become making batteries is a really hot
area right now but all these things
you're learning are also related to
biology and to medicine as well and so
we have one more of the in the own word
segment and John S Eggman studies DNA
damage as related to cancer
and people are like what is you know DNA
damage and cancer have to do with
oxidation reduction potentials but it's
all about oxidation reduction that's
what a lot of the damage is all right so
why don't you hear from from John Essig
men okay that's weird it was starting my
name is Julia I see there we go I'm in
the department of chemistry and
biological engineering MIT toxicologist
by training so I study how cells respond
to toxins and in particular the kinds of
toxins that cause nucleic acid damage
some of these are chemicals from melt in
the environment organic compounds that
cause DNA damage but I'm also interested
in how chemicals inside our body
for example reactive forms of oxygen the
molecule that we breathe also cause
nucleic acid damage oxidation is the
process by which we convert our
metabolic fuels into energy this is a
gummy bear being oxidized by potassium
chlorate this is exactly the kind of
chemical reaction that goes on at your
bodies but in your body it goes on at a
much slower rate oxygen is a
double-edged sword there are two aspects
to its use that is good for us the first
one is by acting as an electron acceptor
sort of like the anode in a battery it
completes the circuit and allows us to
be able to generate free energy that we
can use to power vital processes that's
good the second good thing is that it's
the it's sort of the ammunition of our
innate immune system
oxygen is used to charge the system to
produce one two or three electron
reduced species that themselves can
react with reactive nitrogen species to
create a host of very damaging oxidants
our innate immune system uses these to
protect us against invaders and
oftentimes we believe developing cancer
cells the bad thing is that the second
system I described doesn't have a lot of
accuracy in how it focuses that chemical
warfare so not only are the let's say
invading bacterial cells or the cancer
cells hit but surrounding cells as well
and that creates oxidative damage in the
genomes of those cells those innocent
bystanders if those cells divide the
oxidative damage that's in them can
cause mutations and that sets the cell
along a path accumulated enough
mutations in enough genes you're going
to convert that normal cell into a
cancer cell that will grow out into a
tumor
so that was one of I think the only
video besides mine that involved a
faculty member but I thought it was it's
nice to have a sort of a collection of
different folks talking about their
research and this relates to free
radical species as well as to oxidation
and reduction all right so now I have
another bio example which hopefully
we'll get to at the end but I want to
introduce a very important equation for
this unit an oxidation reduction which
is the Nernst equation so here and this
happens I think to all of us all the
time
our exhausted batteries so when you have
a battery or you go to turn on your
headphones or use your laser pointer or
things like that and the battery doesn't
work anymore it's because the cell
reaction is reached equilibrium so
equilibrium is a state of calmness it's
also a state of batteries not working
anymore
and so what we want to at this point
when it's at equilibrium the cell
generates zero potential across its
electrodes it's not working anymore
it is a dead battery and we need to
think about when it reaches equilibrium
what state it's in at any given time
compared to its equilibrium State so
this really brings us back to some of
the ideas that we had in the chemical
equilibrium unit where we were thinking
about composition of a reaction at any
given time compared to the equilibrium
State so how does cell potential change
with cell composition so again we know a
lot about this and exam three on Friday
has equilibrium on it so we already know
a lot about what happens in
relationships between equilibrium and we
know that Delta G changes as the
composition changes in the cell and
until equilibrium is reached so again
reactions going forward and back in
equilibrium the forward Direction equals
the reverse direction but at some given
time that is not always the case so the
equation that we know from before
is that Delta G equals Delta G naught
plus RT natural log of Q and so we know
Delta if you know Delta G and Q you can
talk about what the Delta G is going to
be at a particular composition of the
cell with a particular value of Q so now
we can think well okay here's what we
know about Q that reaction quotient and
Delta G what do we know about Delta G
and E the standard or the cell potential
and we just talked about that so we know
that Delta G naught equals minus and the
number of moles of electrons Faraday's
constant times that cell potential so
now we can do a rearrangement of terms
we can combine and come up with the
Nernst equation so here are the two
equations one we knew before when we
just learned about today and we can put
those together
we can plug in for Delta G here without
the naught and for Delta G naught with
the not over here and then we can divide
both sides by minus the number of moles
of electrons and Faraday's constant to
come up with the Nernst equation so the
Nernst equation compares our cell
potential under standard conditions with
our cell potential at any given time
based on that reaction quotient Q so
let's do an example with the Nernst
equation so let's calculate the cell
potential at a particular time when the
zinc plus two ions are 0.1 and copper
plus two is point zero zero one zero
molar and we're same cell as we've done
before so step one very easy we want to
calculate the cell potential under
standard conditions and this is
particularly easy because we already did
this today so you already told me it's
plus one point one zero three volts so
we could look up our standard reduction
potentials for our copper couple and our
zinc couple and calculate this so we
already did this and that's why I said
you want to make sure you get this right
because it's often just step one of a
multi-part
problem so we want to get that right
okay step two is calculating q so and
this is a clicker question
all right ten more seconds
all right try to make the math not that
hard okay so Q products over reactants
so one thing you want to do is make sure
you have the reaction written correctly
so you know what the products are and
what the reactants are and here we have
zinc ions over copper copper solid and
think solid don't appear in the
equilibrium expression or in the Q
expression also because they're solids
and their concentration is not changing
so there is enough information that was
given because we don't include the
solids so it's just the concentration of
zinc over the constant of zinc ions over
the concentration of copper ions or 1.0
times 10 to the 2 all right now we need
to know n so n is the number of moles of
electrons that are involved in this
reaction this reaction involves how many
electrons how many it involves to write
so the zinc to zinc plus to think plus
to copper plus 2 to copper so it
involves 2 electrons so this is 2 and
sometimes you can just look at this and
realize it's 2 electrons involved other
times you have to balance the reaction
to figure out how many electrons are
involved it's not obvious by looking at
the reaction this is a simple one but
some of them are not so that's where
balancing reactions comes in handy
alright so now we have everything we
need to plug it in to the Nernst
equation so we can put it in we
calculated the standard cell potential
over here the plus 1 point 1 value we
can look up our everything again
room-temperature natural log of Q we
calculated Q we have two electrons and
Faraday's constant and we can multiply
this out get this value in terms of
significant figures this also is a lot
of fun we have log rules the significant
figures multiplication and
rules of significant figures and adding
and subtracting rules of significant
figures and also in terms of units all
of a sudden vaults appeared that was
nice because our answer should be in
volts but where did they come from so we
had our kelvins are gonna cancel out and
but we have joules and over here and we
have coulombs but luckily a Joule per
Coulomb equals a volt so we're all set
to get our appropriate units all right
so just a couple things that I'll
mention about this as well since almost
all these problems are at room
temperature I try to make your lives a
little bit easier on the exam and
multiply this out for you because these
are all constants and they're big
constants that involve plugging a lot of
numbers in so I will give you this
combined value and if you use log
instead of natural log you need to
change that value here and so what I
actually put on equation sheets are
these equations I'll also put the full
equation there as well but just to make
your lives a little bit easier
it's horrible to make mistakes up there
all right so just briefly what about at
equilibrium what does Q equal Q equals K
Delta G equals zero and so we can
rewrite this expression again which
we've done before and if we take this
and and look at this expression now we
can again combine these we have two
expressions for Delta G naught and
combine them and solve and you can see
that you can also calculate K from
standard reduction potentials so all the
things that we have been learning here
we can always come back to chemical
equilibrium alright so I'm done with
everything but my second bio example so
you'll have to wait until next week
to find out how vitamin b12 gets reduced
in the body okay
alright let's just take 10 more seconds
on the clicker question
okay does someone want a nice t-shirt to
tell me how they got the right answer
okay
pass this back
so when you're looking at it's all quiet
down and zinc zinc is going to reduce
let's quiet down PV because it goes from
a two plus charge to no charge at all so
that's reducing its charge and then in
the reverse reaction PB does the same
thing to zinc two plus and takes it from
two plus two neutral charge so yeah
great so a trick to this is just look at
the equations and figured out what is
being oxidized and what is being reduced
in both directions all right
oxidation reduction it's not just about
batteries batteries of a course are very
important there's a lot of active
research right now and trying to make
better batteries that are more
environmentally friendly have just
solving the energy problem every single
possible way but even if you're not
interested in solving the energy problem
oxidation reduction is really important
in medicine so I'm just gonna give you
another bio example for this so there's
a vitamin in your body vitamin b12 it
has one of the largest negative
reduction potentials of any biological
molecule so we ask the question how can
something like that be reduced in the
body so let me introduce you to vitamin
b12 if you're gonna see this a couple of
times today so vitamin b12 needs to be
reduced to be active but it has a low
reduction potential you need to have
this is the vitamin b12 and you'll see
several more views of it and it's in
pictures in your handout of today's
lecture there's an enzyme that requires
vitamin b12 and another B vitamin called
folic acid and if this enzyme is not
functioning properly in your body it
leads to all sorts of things it's
connected to heart disease if women
don't have enough folic acid while
they're pregnant it can lead to birth
too
neural tube disease where the brain
doesn't form properly also there is
rising evidence connecting a vitamin b12
deficiency with bringing on Alzheimer's
disease and some people actually buy
little b12 squirt bottles and squirt it
into their nose before exams I'm not
sure that helps but as you get older I
would seriously consider taking extra
vitamin b12 all right so since we're
talking about this we'll have a little
nutrition quiz where do you get vitamin
b12 and folic acid in your diet first
let's think about vitamin b12 does
anyone know where you get this besides
vitamin pills in food where do you get
vitamin b12 and food yeah broccoli
helped we hadn't hand up there anyone
else yeah me yes red meat actually any
kind of meat but hardly ever is red meat
the answer to a nutritional question so
I thought I'd put it up there and big
bold red letters yeah you get b12 in
meat plants don't use vitamin b12 so you
can eat as many plants as you want
unless they're covered with bacteria
that do use b12 if you will not get any
in your diet so if you're vegetarian you
should take a vitamin tablet you don't
need much so it's not really a problem
but it does come from red meat what
about folic acid any guesses where folic
acid comes from yeah yes very good so
it's the fall in New England and
hopefully some of you have gone out and
seen the foliage so folic acid does come
from green leafy things and if you're
new eat Norwegian you will also say the
following
so Norwegian scientists claim that the
great longevity of Norwegians has to do
with the fact that their beer is rich in
folic acid and some now they even got a
grant from the Norwegian government to
study the
correlation between beer and health so
that's probably like everyone signed up
for that study I'm sure so red meat and
beer for good health but yes leafy green
vegetables yes folic acid foliage also
orange juice is really high and at one
point they had this commercial for
orange juice you know it's not just for
breakfast anymore it's good for your
heart well that was because of the folic
acid in there and that's actually true
so there was a commercial that actually
provided you with valuable nutritional
advice not so sure about the beer but I
go by the leafy greens and the orange
juice alright so you need both of these
to be healthy but again we have this
problem that vitamin b12 has this low
negative redox potential so how is it
reduced well in the body it's reap its
reduced by a protein called flavodoxin
which has a flavin which is another B
vitamin so there's lots of B vitamins
going on here so the standard reduction
potential for vitamin b12 is minus 0.5
to 6 that's a really low number for
biology and for flavodoxin it's minus
point 2 3 so we asked which is the
better reducing agent and that's a
clicker question
alright let's just do 10 more seconds
yep
so the better reducing agent wants to
reduce other things and get oxidized
itself so vitamin b12 with its low
negative potential is very reducing it
wants to reduce other things it wants to
be an agent of reduction all right so
but that's not what's supposed to happen
it's not supposed to reduce flavodoxin
and it's supposed to happen the other
way around
so is we could ask is the reduction then
a vitamin b12 five-flavor toxins
spontaneous if this is the case yes or
no no chin it shouldn't be spontaneous
it's not going the way that it should go
so we can just calculate how exactly non
spontaneous it is so we can calculate
both what the change in potential is and
we can also calculate Delta G naught
from this so we saw how to do this
before but we're talking about different
kinds of galvanic or electrolytic cells
but now we can talk about use the same
equation that we saw before but talk
about it in terms of a biological system
so before we saw to calculate e nought
of the cell the cell potential
we had the standard reduction potential
for the couple at the anode minus the
standard reduction potential for the
couple at the cathode we can do the same
thing here but just put reduction and
oxidation over here so we can make this
a generic equation and we can plug our
values in so the thing being reduced is
vitamin b12 so we want to put the
reduction potential of b12 in there and
the thing being oxidized is the
flavodoxin and so minus 0.5 to 6 for the
b12 standard reduction potential would
be 12 minus the standard reduction
potential of flavodoxin and we get a
negative number minus point two nine six
volts so then we have a negative value
which should tell us that Delta G is
going to be positive but we can also
calculate that value from the equation
you saw before so just because we're
talking about these equations in terms
of cells before we can also talk about
it's the same exact equation that we use
in biology so minus n number of moles of
electrons this is a one electron process
I would have had to tell you that you
wouldn't necessarily have known it's one
electron
but that's our one what is this term
here this kind of weird-looking F term
what is that again
Faraday's constant then we plug in our
cell potential or potential difference
and we get out a value positive twenty
eight point six kilojoules per mole big
positive number so is this spontaneous
why don't we all have heart disease it
is not a spontaneous reaction so how is
it driven for it this happens in our
body this reaction happens so clearly
something has to happen to make it
spontaneous so when we're talking about
the different kinds of cells we an
electrolytic cell where we could put in
a current to drive a non spontaneous
reaction same thing happens in biology
and the current in this particular case
is a molecule known as s
adenosylmethionine so it's the
methionine amino acid with an adenosyl
group attached to it and the cleavage of
this molecule is very spontaneous it has
a delta g of minus thirty seven point
six kilojoules which is greater than
what we need and we can even calculate
the net Delta G for this reaction the
coupled reaction of the cleavage with
the reduction and if we do that we have
minus thirty seven point six plus twenty
eight point six so minus nine point zero
kilojoules per mole so we can drive this
unfavorable reduction reaction with a
very favorable reaction the cleavage of
s adenosylmethionine and that's how it
works that's why we're all healthy all
right so this is the end of our
oxidation-reduction example we'll
transition to transition metals but
we're not moving very far away from
oxidation
reduction because to do problems that
are affected transition metals you have
to know how to determine oxidation
numbers and all sorts of things